Hi, in the previous videos we've
introduced a new algorithm called A*, and we even created it's
bidirectional version. But this all was somewhat abstract because
to implement this algorithm in practice, we need some potential function. And we don't know yet
where to get that potential function so that it is feasible and good enough. So first we'll prove a Lemma. Remember we were talking
about lower bounds, we were talking that most of the time,
potential function of a vertex is a lower bound on the distance
between this vertex and the target. So now we'll prove that actually if
potential function is feasible, and the potential of the target
vertex is less than or equal to 0, then this potential
function is indeed a lower bound on the distance between the current vertex
and the target vertex for any vertex v. To prove that,
we should know that first l pi of (x,y) is non-negative for any x,y if pi is
feasible, by definition of feasibility. And so also l pi of any path p, the length of any path in the new
graph is also non-negative. Then, we take any shortest path
between v and t, and call it P. And then we know that zero is less than or
equal to the length of this path because the length of each path
in the new graph is non-negative. And this length of
the path in the new graph is equal to the length of
the path in the initial graph minus the potential of the vertex v
plus the potential of the target vertex. But now remember that potential of
the target vertex is non-positive. So, this is less than or
equal to length of the path and initial graph minus potential of vertex v. And we know that this final expression
is bigger than or equal to zero. Which means, in turn,
that the potential of v is less than or equal to the length of
the path in the initial graph. Which is the shortest path between v and
t, so it is equal to the distance from from
v to t, so we've proven our Lemma. Now it's time to introduce at
least one specific potential, and we'll start with the one we
already discussed several times, we'll just prove that this is
really a good physical potential. So we consider a road
network on a plane map where any vertex has its coordinates x and
y. Then the potential given
by Euclidean distance and the Euclidean distance between two points
is basically the length of a line segment connecting those two points. It is given by the form of pi of v is
equal to the Euclidean distance from v to the target. Which is in turn equal to the square root of the sum of squares of differences
of the coordinates of v and the target. So we stated this
potential is feasible and that the potential of
the target vertex is zero. And if we prove this Lemma this in turn
means that given the previous Lemma that this potential is always
a lower bound on the actual distance in this road network from v to the target. But this is also obvious in self
because this potential is equal to the straight line segment
length between v and the target. And of course no path in the road network
and be shorter then the length of the straight lines segment between
current vertex and the target vertex. So our previous Lemma
makes sense in this case. Now lets prove that this
is a good potential. So, we know for any edge (u,v) the length
of this edge is greater then or equal to the Euclidean potential to the Euclidean
distance between these two nodes. Because segment is the shortest path
between two points on the plane. Now we see that the potential of
any node u, is equal by definition to the Euclidean distance between
this node u and the target node. And then we can use the triangle
inequality for the Euclidean distance, to state that the Euclidean distance
between u and t is less than or equal to the distance between u and
v, plus the distance between v and t. Now we know that the Euclidean distance
between u and v is less than or equal to the length of
the edge between u and v. And the Euclidean distance between v and
t is exactly equal to the potential of v. So we see that pi(u) is less than or
equal to l(u,v) + pi(v). And we can write this as l (u,
v)- pi (u) + pi (v) is non-negative. And this is by definition the length of the edge in the new graph
with new edge weights. And we see that all the edge weights
in the new graph are non-negative. And that's why the potential
pi is really feasible. And also it's obvious that the potential
of the target vertex is zero because it's basically the distance from the target
vertex to itself and it is equal to zero. So to implement an actual specific
A* algorithm on a plane map, we need to find the shortest path from
source vertex to the target vertex, so for each node v we can compute,
either pre compute or compute on the fly, the potential. Which is equal to the Euclidean
distance from v to d, to do that we just need the coordinates
of v and coordinates of t and this computation works in constant time. And then we just launch Dijkstra's
algorithm with potentials pi of v, and this will be our A star. And even with Euclidean
distance potential, this will work faster than
the regular Dijkstra's algorithm. And you will see that in one of
the problems of this project.