Ernest Hemingway wrote, all my life, I've looked at words as though I
were seeing them for the first time. Words are everywhere in programming. From Google searches to bioinformatics
where DNA is sometimes represented as a string of As, Ts, Cs, and Gs,
to simple things like message dialogues. Right now, were going to explore
Python's string representation and how we can manipulate these values. A string literal is
a sequence of characters. In Python, this type is called str. Strings start and
end with a single or double quote. Such as hello or how are you? We can include punctuation,
as we've just seen, or hyphens. Strings are values and
can't be used in an assignment statement. It's a sunny day, we like a side to
say to somebody, what a beautiful day. And if it's storming,
we might want to say, wow, you're dripping wet. But already we can see
that we have a problem, because it goes through green
to black at that second hyphen. And indeed, we have a syntax error. The problem, of course, is that we're trying to use a single
quote inside a single quoted string. And Python, of course,
doesn't really know what we're doing. So, Because of this,
Python allows you to use double quotes. And now a sunny_greeting. There's that, and
a storm_greeting, is all wet. We have another choice. Instead of using the double
quotes on this string, we are allowed to use what's called
the escape character, an escape sequence. If we use a backslash, you'll notice first
that the string is turned all green. And when I hit return,
what we're going to see is that the string is going to appear but
we're not going to see the backslash. Furthermore, the single quote
markers on the beginning and end of the string will be
turned into double quotes. We can concatenate strings
using operator plus. Notice that we have to
put in our own spaces. With this, we can write a version of
Mad Libs where we ask a friend for a noun. Let's say they picked earthworm. So we're going to have
the start of a puzzle. And we would like to end this,
let's say with an exclamation mark. And the noun they picked is earthworm. Now let’s have them together. We can build up a repeated string
using the multiplication operator. And as with regular math, multiplication
has precedence over addition. We can override this using parenthesis. We can't, however,
add a string to an int or a float. Can't convert float
object to str implicitly. Sends a little danger,
notice that it's a TypeError. You'll see in a later lecture how
to combine strings and numbers. That'll be coming up soon. We can't multiply strings either, even
if that string has a number inside it. Can't multiply sequence
by non-int of type 'str'. Other operators won't work. TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for
-: 'str' and 'str'. We can't use two strings
together with subtraction. We can't divide either. Unsupported operand types for
division, for raising to a power. Notice that every one of
these is a type error.