This week we're going to deepen our
investigation to how Python can be used to manipulate, clean, and query data by
looking at the Pandas data tool kit. Pandas was created by
Wes McKinney in 2008, and is an open source project under
a very permissive license. As an open source project
it's got a strong community, with 100 software developers all
committing code to help make it better. There's a couple of places you should
consider going to for help with Pandas. Obviously, the course discussion
forums make for a great resource. But I don't think they're
the best resource for Pandas problems in particular. I think the best resource is a question
answering site called Stack Overflow. Stack Overflow is used broadly within
the software development community to post questions about programming, programming
languages, and programming toolkits. What's special about Stack Overflow
is that it's heavily curated by the community. And the Pandas community, in particular,
uses it as their number one resource for helping new members. It's quite possible if you post
a question to Stack Overflow, and tag it as being Pandas and Python related, that a Pandas developer
will actually respond to your question. In addition to posting questions,
Stack Overflow is a great place to go to see what issues people are having and
how they can be solved. You can learn a lot from browsing
Stacks at Stack Overflow. A second resource you might
want to consider are books. In 2012 Wes McKinney wrote the definitive
Pandas reference book called Python for Data Analysis and published by O'Reilly. While it's starting to get a bit dated, he recently announced that a new
edition of the book is coming, and I still consider this a go to book for
understanding how Pandas works. I also appreciate the more brief
book Leaning the Pandas Library by Matt Harrison. It's not a comprehensive book
on data analysis and statistics. But if you just want to learn
the basics of Pandas and want to do so quickly,
I think it's a well laid out volume. The field of data science
is rapidly changing. There's new toolkits and
method being created everyday. It can be tough to stay on top of it all. And Marco Rodriguez and Tim Golden maintained a wonderful blog
aggregator site called Planet Python. You can visit the webpage at
planetpython.org, subscribe with an RSS reader, or get the latest articles
from the @PlanetPython Twitter feed. There's lots of regular Python
data science contributors, and I highly recommend it if
you follow RSS feeds. Here's my last plug on how
to deepen your learning. Kyle Polich runs an excellent
podcast called Data Skeptic. Well, it isn't Python based per se,
it's well produced and it has a wonderful mixture of interviews
with experts in the field as well as short educational lessons. Much of the word he describes is
specific to machine learning methods. But if that's something you are planning
to explore through this specialization this course is in, I would really
encourage you to subscribe to his podcast. Well that's it for a little bit
of an introduction to this week. Next we're going to dive right into Pandas
and talk about the series data structure.