Algorithms are everywhere. Whether you are writing software,
analyzing a genome, predicting traffic jams, producing
automatic movie recommendations, or just surfing the Internet,
you're dealing with algorithms. Every single branch of computer
science uses algorithms, so a course on algorithms and data structures
is an essential part of any CS curriculum. >> It's important that
the algorithms we use are efficient as users want to see the search
results in a blink of an eye even if they search through
trillions of web pages. A poorly thought out algorithm could
take literally centuries to process all the webpages indexed by a search engine or
all the Facebook posts. And thus, algorithmic improvements are
necessary to make these systems practical. That's why tech companies
always ask lots of algorithmic questions at the interviews. >> In data science problems,
like ranking internet search results, predicting road accidents, and
recommending movies to users, advanced algorithms are used to
achieve excellent search quality, high prediction accuracy, and
to make relevant recommendations. However, even for a simple machine
learning algorithm like linear regression to be able to process big
data is usually a challenge. When advanced algorithms such as deep
neural networks are applied to huge data sets they make
extremely accurate predictions. Recently starting to even outperform
humans in some areas of vision and speech recognition, but
getting those algorithms to work in hours instead of years on
a large dataset is hard. And performing experiments quickly
is crucial in data science. >> Algorithms are everywhere. Each of trillions of cells in
your body executes a complex and still poorly understood algorithm. And algorithm are the key for solving important biomedical
problems such as what are the mutations that differentiate you from me and
how is it they relate to diseases. In this specialization you will learn
the theory behind the algorithm. Implement algorithm in the programming
language of your choice and apply them to solving practical problems such as
assembling the genome from millions of tiny fragments, the largest jigsaw
puzzle ever assembled by humans. >> To conclude, algorithms are everywhere. And it is important to design your
algorithms and to implement them. To turn you into a pro in algorithm design
we will give you nearly 100 programming assignments in this class. Your solutions will be checked
automatically, and you will learn how to implement, test, and debug fast algorithms solving large and
difficult problems in seconds. We look forward to seeing
you in this class. We know it will make you
a better programmer. >> Algorithms are everywhere. In fact you just saw five algorithms
solving the fundamental sorting problem in computer science, and
they all have different running times. In fact while four of them are about to
finish one will take a much longer time. In this specialization you'll be able to
implement all of these algorithms, and master the skill of answering
both algorithmic and programming questions
at your next interview.