A pivot table is a way of summarizing data
in a data frame for a particular purpose. It makes heavy use of
the aggregation function. A pivot table is itself a data frame,
where the rows represent one variable that you're interested in, the columns another,
and the cell's some aggregate value. A pivot table also tends to
includes marginal values as well, which are the sums for
each column and row. This allows you to be able to see the
relationship between two variables at just a glance. Let's take a look at an example. Here we'll load a new data set, cars.csv. This data set comes from the Open Data
Initiative of the Canadian government. And has information about the efficiency
of different electric cars which are available for purchase. When we look at the head
of the data frame, we'll see that there are model years,
vendors, sizes of cars, and statistics, like how big the battery
is in kilowatt hours. A pivot table allows us to pivot out one
of these columns into a new column headers and compare it against another
column as row indices. For instance, let's say we wanted to compare the makes
of electric vehicles versus the years and that we wanted to do this comparison
in terms of battery capacity. To do this, we tell pandas we
want the values to be kilowatts, the index to be the year and
the columns to be the make. Then we specify that
the aggregation function, and here we'll use the NumPy mean. Here's the results. We see there are NaN values for vendors who didn't have an entry
in a given year like Ford in 2012. And we see that most vendors don't have a
change in battery capacity over the years, except for Tesla,
as they've introduced several new models. Now, pivot tables aren't limited to one
function that you might want to apply. You can pass aggfunc, a list of
the different functions to apply, and pandas will provide you with the
result using hierarchical column names. Here, I’ll also pass margins equals true. And that you can see for each of
the functions there's now an all category, which shows the overall mean and
the minimum values for a given year and a given vendor. So that's pivot tables. This has been a pretty short description,
but they're incredibly useful when
dealing with numeric data. And of course, you can pass any function
you want to the aggregate function, including those that you define yourself.