So what's the day-to-day work
of someone in IT support like? Well, it varies a ton, based on whether
you're doing in personal or remote, support and at a small business or
a large enterprise company. And there's really no such thing as
day-to-day work, since the puzzles and challenges are always new and interesting. But in general, an IT support specialist
makes sure that an organization's technological equipment
is running smoothly. This includes managing, installing,
maintaining, troubleshooting and configuring office and
computing equipment. This program is designed
to prepare you for an entry level role in
IT help desk support. You'll learn how to setup
a user's desktop or workstation, how to install the computer
applications that people use the most. You'll learn how to fix a problem or
troubleshoot when something goes wrong and how to put practices in place to prevent
similar problems from happening again. Not only will you learn the technical
aspects of troubleshooting a problem, you'll also learn how to communicate
with users in order to best assist them. We'll also show you how to set up
a network from scratch to connect to the Internet. Teach you a thing or two about automation
and scripting and teach you about how to implement security to make sure your
systems are safe from hackers and other risk. For me, my favorite part of IT
support is the problem solving aspect. I love to exercise my creativity to
spin up a solution to a user's issue. Being an IT journalist also gave me the
flexibility to learn and practice so many different skills and eventually determined
where I want to focus my career. Plus, when things go wrong or you fail at
something in IT, you can take the feedback from those mistakes and be better equipped
to tackle them the next time around. Using failure as a feedback, is
an important skill both in IT and in life. For me, that's why I was so
attracted to the IT field. I love the process of problem solving and constantly stretching myself to learn and
grow. There's also never been more opportunity
to get into the IT industry than now. Not only is the field of
IT incredibly diverse, but job prospects are also booming. It's projected that IT jobs in the US
alone will grow 12% in the next decade. That's higher than the average for
all other occupations. So what does this all mean? There are thousands of companies
around the world searching for IT professionals like you. So the main gist is that IT is totally
awesome and full of opportunity, and we're so excited that you're here. So let's dive right in.