The absence of static typing in Python
doesn't mean that there aren't types. The Python language has a built in
function called type which will show you what type a given reference is. Some of the common types includes strings,
the none type as we’ve discussed. Integers and floating point variables. As we've seen you can have
reference as to function as well as a function type also exist. Typed objects have properties
associated with them, and these properties can be data or functions. A lot of Python's built around different
kinds of sequences or collection types. And there's three native kinds of
collections that we're going to talk about, tuples, lists, and dictionaries. A tuple is a sequence of variables
which itself is immutable. That means that a tuple has
items in an ordering, but that it cannot be changed once created. We write tuples using parentheses, and
we can mix types for the contents of the tuple. Here's a tuple which has four items. Two are numbers, and two are strings. Note here that I've used single quotes for a string, whereas previously
I've used double quotes. In Python, either single or double quotes
can be used to denote string values. Lists are very similar, but
they can be mutable, so you can change their length, number
of elements, and the element values. A list is declared using
the square brackets. There are a couple of different ways
to change the contents of a list. One is through the append function which
allows you to append new items to the end of the list. Both lists and tuples are iterable types, so you can write loops to go
through every value they hold. The norm, if you want to look each item
in the list is to use a for statement. This is similar to the for each loop
in languages like Java and C# but note that there's no typing required. Lists and tuples can also be accessed
as arrays might in other languages, by using the square bracket operator,
which is called the indexing operator. The first item of the list
starts at position zero and to get the length of the list,
we use the built in len function. There are some other common functions
that you might expect like min and max which will find the minimum or
maximum values in a given list or tuple. Python lists and tuples also have some basic mathematical
operations that can be allowed on them. The plus sign concatenates lists for
instance. And the asterisks repeats
the values of a list. A very common operator is the in operator. This looks at set membership and
returns a boolean value of true or false depending on whether
one item is in a given list. We're going to dive more into operators
and special kinds of sequences in a future week when we look at
a technique called broadcasting. Perhaps the most interesting operations
you can do with lists are called slicing. Where the square bracket array syntax for
accessing an element might look fairly similar to that which
you've seen in other languages. In Python, the indexing operator
allows you to submit multiple values. The first parameter is
the starting location, if this is the only element then
one item is return from the list. The second parameter is
the end of the slice. It's an exclusive end so if you slice
with the first parameter being zero the next parameter being one,
then you only get back one item. This is much easier to
explain with an example. One handy aspect of Python is
that all strings are actually just lists of characters so
slicing works wonderfully on them. Here's an example. When we run x[0] or x[0:1] we get
just the first character of the string. But when we run x[0:2], we get
the first two characters of the string. Our indexing values can also be
negative which is really cool. And this means to index from
the back of the string. So x[-1] gets us the last letter
of the string, and x[-4:-2] reads in all of the characters from
the 4th last to the 2nd last positions. Finally if we want to
reference the start or the end of the string implicitly, we can
by just leaving the parameter empty. So x[:3] starts with the first character and
goes until position three. And the x[3:] starts with the fourth
character because indexing always begins with zero and goes to the end of the list. Slicing is core to the Python language and is a big part of the scientific
computing with Python as well. Especially if you start
manipulating matrices. We're going to talk more about
slicing in the next module. But here's a question to get you started. Now, I'm taking a bit of an aside here
to talk about manipulating strings. Slicing isn't the only way
to manipulate strings. And a common activity is to split
strings based on substrings. That is, to go through
the string looking for patterns, and segmenting it as appropriate. This is called regular
expression evaluation, and we're going to cover this in detail in the
section of the specialization which deals with text mining since it's
a very common operation. But Python has some basic tools for
text analysis. And I'm going to show you them here. As we saw,
strings are just lists of characters. So operations you can do on a list,
you can do on a string. This means that you can concatenate two
strings together using the plus operator. And multiplying strings
will repeat a given string. You can also search for
strings using the in operator. The string type has an associated
function called split. This function breaks the string up into
substrings based on a simple pattern. Here for instance, I'll just split my full name based on
the presence of a space character. The result is a list of four elements. We can choose the first element with the
indexing operator to be the first name, and the last element to be my last name. We'll touch on strings just a bit more but
before we do, I want to talk about dictionaries. Dictionaries are similar to lists and
tuples in that they hold a collection of items, but they're labeled collections
which do not have an ordering. This means that for
each value you insert into the dictionary, you must also give a key
to get that value out. In other languages the structure
is often called a map. And in Python we use curly
braces to denote a dictionary. Here is an example where we might
link names to email addresses. You can see that we indicate each item
of the dictionary when creating it using a pair of values
separated by colons. Then you can retrieve a value for
a given label using the indexing operator. The types you use for indices or
values in the dictionary can be anything. And this could be a mixture
of types if you prefer. We can add new items to the dictionary
using the same indexing operator we are used to. Just on the left hand side of a statement. You an iterate over all of the items
in a dictionary in a number of ways. First you can iterate
over all of the keys and just pull the contents out as you see fit. Or you can iterate over the values and
just ignore the keys. Finally you can iterate
over both the values and the keys at once using
the item's function. This last example is
a little bit different, and it's an example of
something called unpacking. In Python you can have a sequence.
That's a list or a tuple of values, and you can unpack those items into different
variables through assignment in one statement. Here's another example of that, where
we have a tuple that has my first name, last name, and email address. I declare three variables and
assign them to the tuple. Underneath, Python has unpacked the tuple,
and assigned each of these variables in order. We can see that if we add
a fourth item to the tuple, Python isn't sure how to unpack that,
so we have an error. That's an overview of built
in types with Python. In the next lecture,
we're going to revisit strings briefly, then start working with some data files.