Let's start with a discussion
of distributions. And we'll start with the most
common using a coin. When a coin is flipped it has
a probability of landing heads up and a probability of landing tails up. If we flip a coin many times we collect
a number of measurements of the heads and tails that landed face up and intuitively we know that the number
of times we get a heads up will be equal about the number of times
we get a tails up for a fair coin. If you flipped a coin a hundred times and you received heads each time you'd
probably doubt the fairness of that coin. We can consider the result of each flip
of this coin as a random variable. When we can consider the set of all
possible random variables together we call this a distribution. In this case the distribution
is called binomial since there's two possible
outputs a heads or a tails. It's also an example of a discreet
distribution since there are only categories being used a heads and
a tails and not real numbers. NumPy actually has some
distributions built into it allowing us to make random flips
of a coin with given parameters. Let's give it a try. Here we ask for a number from
the NumPy binomial distribution. We have two parameters to pass in. The first is the number of
times we want it to run. The second is the chance we get a zero,
which we will use to represent heads here. Let's run one round of this simulation. Great so if you're following along in a Jupyter
notebook you either got a zero or a one. And half of you got a value that
agreed with the one that I got. What if we run the simulation
a thousand times and divided the result by a thousand. Well you see a number
pretty close to 0.5 which means half of the time we had a heads and
half of the time we had a tails. Of course an even weighted binomial
distribution is only one simple example. We can also have unevenly
weighted binomial distributions. For instance what's the chance although
we're tornado today while I’m filming. It's pretty low even though
we do get tornadoes here. So maybe there a hundredth of a percentage chance. We can put this into a binomial
distribution as a weighting in NumPy. If we run this 100,000 times we see
there are pretty minimal tornado events. So you might be wondering why I'm
talking about such a simple and intuitive distribution. I mean we all understand
flipping a coin for when we had to make important
decisions as children. But what I want to demonstrate is that the
computational tools are starting to allow us to simulate the world which
helps us answer questions. I could have shown you
the math behind this so we could have worked
out the probabilities. But a simulation is essentially
another form of inquiry. Let's take one more example. Let's say the chance of a tornado
here in Ann Arbor on any given day, is 1% regardless of the time of year. That's higher than realistic but
it makes for a quicker demo. And lets say if there's a tornado I'm
going to get away from the windows and hide, then come back and
do my recording the next day. So what's the chance of this
happening two days in a row? Well we can use the binomial
distribution in NumPy to simulate this. Here we create an empty list and we create
a number of potential tornado events by asking the NumPy binomial function
using our chance of tornado. We'll do this a million times which is
just shy of 3,000 years worth of events. This process is called
sampling the distribution. Now we can write a little loop to
go through the list and look for any two adjacent pairs of ones which means that there were two days
that had back to back tornadoes. We see that this ends up being roughly 102
day tornado events over the 3,000 years. Which frankly is still too many for me. My point here though is that modern
computational power allows us to very quickly simulate the effects of
different parameters in a distribution. Leading to a new way of
understanding the problem. You don't have to work
out all the math you can quite often simulate the problem
instead and observe the results. In the next lecture we'll talk
a little bit more about distributions.