Hi, I'm Michael Levin and
together we will study Greedy Algorithms. They are some of the simplest
algorithms that exist and they usually seem a pretty natural
way to try solving a problem. We will start with a few
examples of problems that can be solved by greedy algorithms,
just to illustrate how they work. And our very first problem is
a problem about largest number. And for this problem, you will probably be
able to come up with a greedy algorithm yourself, because that is really
a very natural thing to do. So imagine this situation. You are trying to get a job at a company
and you already had a few interviews, and everything went well. Now you have your final
interview with the boss, and he tells you that he
will give you an offer. But instead of negotiating
your salary with you, he will give you a few pieces of
paper with digits written on them. And your task will be to arrange
those digits in a row, so that when you read the number from left
to right, that will be your salary. So basically, you have a problem. Given a few digits, to arrange them
in the largest possible number. And there are a few examples
of such numbers on the slide. So what do you think will be
the correct answer to this problem? And of course,
the correct answer is 997531. And it's pretty obvious that you should
arrange numbers from the largest to the smallest, from left to right. But let's look at how
the greedy algorithm does that. So, the Greedy Strategy is start
with a list of digits then find the maximum digit in the list. Append it to the number and
remove it from the list. And then repeat this process until
there are no digits left in the list. So on the next step we will find
the largest digit, which is again 9. We'll append it to the number to
the right and remove it from the list. Then we will find 7 as the largest
digit appended to the right and remove it from the list. And then we'll continue with 5, 3, and 1. And then we get the correct answer,
997531. And in the next video,
we will design an algorithm to find the minimum number of refuels
during a long journey by car. We will see similarities
between these two problems, largest number problem and
car refueling problem. And we will define how greedy
algorithms work in general.