The common work flow is to read
your data into a DataFrame then reduce this DataFrame
to the particular columns or rows that you're interested
in working with. As you've seen, the Panda's toolkit
tries to give you views on a DataFrame. This is much faster than copying data and
much more memory efficient too. But it does mean that if you're
manipulating the data you have to be aware that any changes to
the DataFrame you're working on may have an impact on the base
data frame you used originally. Here's an example using our same
purchasing DataFrame from earlier. We can create a series based on just the
cost category using the square brackets. Then we can increase the cost in
this series using broadcasting. Now if we look at our original DataFrame,
we see those costs have risen as well. This is an important
consideration to watch out for. If you want to explicitly use a copy, then you should consider calling the copy
method on the DataFrame for it first. In this course, we'll be largely using
smaller, moderate-sized datasets. As I mentioned, a common workflow is to read the dataset
in, usually from some external file. We saw previously how you can do this
using Python, and lists, and dictionaries. You can imagine how you might use those
dictionaries to create a Pandas DataFrame. Thankfully, Pandas has
built-in support for delimited files such as CSV
files as well as a variety of other data formats including relational
databases, Excel, and HTML tables. I've saved a CSV file called olympics.csv, which has data from Wikipedia that
contains a summary list of the medal various countries have
won at the Olympics. We can take a look at this file
using the shell command cat. Which we can invoke directly
using the exclamation point. What happens here is that when the Jupyter
notebook sees a line beginning with an exclamation mark, it sends the rest of
the line to the operating system shell for evaluation. So cat works on Linux and Macs,
as well as in the Coursera platform, but might not work on Windows. You don't need to worry
too much about this. I just wanted to show how a Jupyter
notebook can integrate with the operating system to provide you with even
more tools to look at your data. We see from the cat output that
there seems to be a numeric list of columns followed by a bunch
of column identifiers. The column identifiers have some
odd looking characters in them. This is the unicode numero sign,
which means number of. Then we have rows of data,
all columns separated. We can read this into a DataFrame
by calling the read_csv function of the module. When we look at the DataFrame we see
that the first cell has an NaN in it since it's an empty value, and the rows
have been automatically indexed for us. It seems pretty clear that the first
row of data in the DataFrame is what we really want to see as the column names. It also seems like the first column
in the data is the country name, which we would like to make an index. Read csv has a number of parameters
that we can use to indicate to Pandas how rows and
columns should be labeled. For instance, we can use the index call to
indicate which column should be the index and we can also use the header parameter
to indicate which row from the data file should be used as the header. Let's re-import that data and center index
value to be 0 which is the first column and let set a column headers to be
read from the second row of data. We can do this by using
the skip rows parameters, to tell Pandas to ignore the first row,
which was made up of numeric column names. Now this data came from the all time
Olympic games medal table on Wikipedia. If we head to the page we could see
that instead of running gold, silver and bronze in the pages, these nice
little icons with a one, a two, and a three in them In our csv file these
were represented with the strings 01 !, 02 !, and so on. We see that the column values are repeated
which really isn't good practice. Panda's recognize this in a panda.1 and
.2 to make things more unique. But this labeling isn't really
as clear as it could be, so we should clean up the data file. We can of course do this just by going and
editing the CSV file directly, but we can also set the column names
using the Pandas name property. Panda stores a list of all of
the columns in the .columns attribute. We can change the values of the column
names by iterating over this list and calling the rename method
of the data frame. Now, I'm going to copy and
paste this in to speed up things but we can walk through what is going on here. Here we just iterate through all
of the columns looking to see if they start with a 01, 02,
03 or numeric character. If they do, we can call rename and set the column parameters to a dictionary
with the keys being the column we want to replace and
the value being the new value we want. Here we'll slice some of
the old values in two, since we don't want to lose
the unique appended values. We'll also set the ever-important
in place parameter to true so Pandas knows to update
this data frame directly. All right, that's more on the data frame
with a focus on the workflow of actually getting data in and into a place
where we might want to query it.