Welcome to an introduction
to Data Science with Python. This course is the first course
out of five in a larger Python and Data Science Specialization. Each course progressively builds on your
knowledge from previous courses to give you a well-rounded view of what
Data Science is, while helping you to develop skills to practice data science. The specialization is of an intermediate
level or difficulty, and we expect that you have studied some basic
programming and statistics in the past. In this specialization, we're focused on teaching applied skills
using the Python programming language. There are many other tools that
one can use in data science, such as specialized statistical
analysis languages like R, or more general purpose programming
languages like Java and C. We chose Python as the basis for
this specialization for three reasons. First, it's easy to learn. Python is now the language of choice for introducing university
students to programming. It's used in eight out of 10 of
the US's top computer science programs. Python programs tend to have minimal
templating that you've might have seen in other languages, and have more natural constructs for typical
tasks you might need to accomplish. If you have programming experience, but not Python-specific experience,
you can pick up Python very quickly. Second, it's full featured. Python is a very general programming
language with a lot of built-in libraries and excels at manipulating data,
network programming, and databases. It's mature, and there's plenty of resources
available from books to online courses. Finally, Python has a significant set
of data science libraries one can use. The base of these is called
the SciPy Ecosystem, and it even has its own conference series. Both the interface that we're going
to use for doing assignments, called Jupiter Notebooks,
and the main libraries for the first two courses, Pandas and
Matplotlib, are part of the SciPy stack, and provide an excellent basis for moving
into machine learning, text mining and network analysis. This first course is
broken into four modules. The first module focuses on
getting prerequisites in place and reviews some of the basics
of the Python language. Don't worry, if you already have Python
down and you want to be challenged, we have some advanced
Python in here as well. The advanced Python isn't
strictly necessary for the rest of the specialization, but many
of these examples you might see on the web or broader data science topics like
Big Data and real-time analytics, might require a knowledge of some
of these more specialized features. In the second module we're going
to dig into the pandas Toolkit. The pandas Toolkit is a fundamental
in Python data science, and provides a data structure for
thinking about data in a tabular form. This Toolkit helps bring functionality
that exists in R into the Python world. It's seen significant adoption
over the last five years. Much of the thinking behind pandas
is similar to relational theory. So if you have a background in databases, you'll find the pandas environment
fairly natural to work in. At the same time, some of the more
advanced ways to query and manipulate pandas' data frames like
boolean masking and hierarchical indexing are different than in databases and
require some careful discussion. So we'll discuss these in
module three of this course. The final module of the course is
dedicated to the course project where you'll take some datasets,
merge and clean them, then process the data and
answer some questions. In this week we'll discuss
basic statistical tests and methods that ensure you have a solid grasp
going forward into the next course. At the same time the intent is for your course project to be a demonstration
of the skills that you've gained in manipulating messy data
into something of coherence. Before we go into programming
fundamentals, though, we'll talk a bit more about what data science is, and
why it's sweeping over the world.