Interest in data science
is at an all time high, and really has exploded in popularity
in the last couple of years. A fun way to see this is to hit
up the Google Trends website. Google Trends shows search
keyword information over time. We could see that the term ‘data
science’ is massively popular, really all across the globe. We can also see that related
queries include topics like python. And we can even see certain tool kits
that we’ll be teaching in this course. For instance, here's the trend for python pandas, which is the focus of
module two and three in this course. Before we jump in to a discussion of data
science, I'd like to take a moment and have you reflect on what you
think data science is, and why you came to this course to explore. If someone you ran into asked you
what data science was all about, what would you tell them? The history of data science goes
back a little further than 2004, which is where the Google
search term history begins. But this, at least, gives a sense for
how popular the area is now. I think the popularity of interest in
the area comes from the network and data driven society we
find ourselves living in. When people think of
the term data scientist, they tend to think of Google or
Amazon or Facebook, places with big artificial intelligence
research teams, and certainly these are some amazing companies who are doing
great things with data science. But data scientist aren’t just limited
to careers with tech companies. Almost every company is turning to data
science to better understand how to build products, serve customers and
leverage new opportunities. And companies aren't the only one. 
In this first course I will be giving lectures here in the University of
Michigan digital innovation greenhouse. Which was a lab within the office
of academic innovation. The space is used by a team which includes
programmers, behavioral scientists and data scientists who aim to build
technologies to support next generation teaching and learning. The background of individuals
here is very broad and includes folks with computer science and information degrees, psychology
degrees, and law and business degrees. And here they apply data driven
methodologies to aid in their discovery, from statistical analysis,
machine learning and text mining, to information visualization. And this need for data driven intelligence
and skills is growing in companies and organizations throughout the world. Let's start with a look at the roots
of the field of data science. The techniques and methodologies of data
science stem from the fields of computer science and statistics. One of the most well cited diagrams
describing the field comes from Drew Conway where he suggested data science is
the intersection of hacking skills, math and stats knowledge,
and substantial expertise. This diagram might be a bit
of an oversimplification, but I think it's a great start. Data science is definitely one of those
areas where you ask ten people and get ten different answers. One thing that I think is missing from
this diagram is the underlining need for the scientific inquiry. You don't necessarily get this for
having good hacking skills or math and statistic knowledge. A good data scientist bring skepticism,
experimentation, simulation, and replication to bear
on understanding a given phenomena. Whether it be trying to predict sales
at the coffee shop, cluster products in an online store, determine who's
likely to win in election or mine health data from
physiological sensors like Fitbits. In this specialization we're going to
touch on all of these issue broadly but really focus on skills. In addition to the hacking
skills Conway mentions, we're going to develop some communication
skills in the form of charting, graphing, and related visualizations. A good data scientist is one who can
communicate their findings clearly to others and having some fundamental
tools in the toolkit as useful here. We can find a more comprehensive and
academic discussion in the work of David Donoho,
Professor of Statistics in Stanford. Who's providing excellent commentary
of views of the field in a paper entitled 50 years of data science. We've provided a link to
that in a course resources. There's lots to think
about with this paper, but I want to draw your
attention to section 8, where he describes the field broadly as
being made up of six activities. The first of these is Data Exploration and Preparation, this involves cleaning data
and manipulating it for further analysis. The second is Data Representation and
Transformation. This specialization is going to
look at several different forms of representing data. Tabular structures in the first course,
text data in the fourth course, and graph-based data in the last course. These are just some of the kinds of data
you have to deal with as a data scientist. The third activity is Computing with
Data, and Donoho mentioned specifically the languages of R and
Python as being fundamental here. He goes further and
he talks about pipelining and how data scientist need to be able
to work with different languages for different parts on an analysis project and
I think this is very true. Unlike enterprise software projects,
where you might use one language for implementing all of
the functionality you need. Modern data science projects can
span many different languages and computing paradigms. Knowing when to use the right tool for
the job is an important attribute. The fourth activity is Data Modeling.
I think data modeling is a big space but Donoho speaks specifically
about predictive modeling, which we’ll talk about in the third
MOOC in this specialization and generative modeling. There's some fundamental differences here,
and I think the increased interest in predictive modeling is helping to
fuel the current data science push. In particular, the modern world,
with massive data streams and significant computational power, gives us opportunity to rapidly
experiment with making predictions. Allowing us to innovate and
evaluate new data science techniques. The fifth activity is
Data Visualization and Presentation. Now the word visualization brings with it
a number of connotations, such as charting and graphing, as well as 3D visualizations
and interactive environments. In the second course we'll learn the
basics of information visualization, but keep in mind that info viz
is a whole field of its own. Finally, Donoho suggests there's sort
of a meta activity which he calls the science about data science. That is understanding what works and
what doesn't in data science, and building ways to leverage
these discoveries. We see examples of this as new tools and paradigms of computing are invented
to change the way data science works. I think Donoho provides a really nice
overview of the area of the data science. In his paper he also alludes
to several investments, research institutions are
putting into the field. Including the University of California
in Berkeley, New York University, MIT and the University in Michigan, here, which just kicked off a $100
million data science initiative. Data science is becoming a fundamental
way of understanding the world around us. While many institutions, including my own, are starting to offer data science
masters degrees and certificate. I think it's important to think of data
science as a sort of epistemology, or a way of knowing. Data science thinking can be useful in
a variety of disciplines and careers. It is a way of approaching problems and
critical thinking skills. But this is a skills based course, so in
the next lecture we're going to jump right in and start talking about
the Python programming language.