Before we jump into Python, I want to show you a couple of
features of the Coursera platform. Here is our course that
I have logged in to. You see that there is three weeks. When we click on a week we have
built in Jupyter notebooks. Now these are a great way
to learn data science and it's something new that the Coursarians
have added to the platform for us. When you see one of the notebooks
you can click on it, you can open the notebook
into a new window and you can actually follow along exactly
with everything that we talk about. So you could actually run this
code yourself just by selecting the code and hitting Shift+Enter, and just run through it actually testing
all of the different pieces of code. And so I think a lot of people will
use this in a split screen mode. So you take this window out and
you watch the video in one window while you actually walk
through the code in another. I think it's a great addition. Jumping back, we also have
assignments that are built in. Jumping back to the course home page,
we'll go to week two. In week two we have an assignment built
right into the jupiter notebook and this is great. So you can open the jupyter notebook for
assignment two. You get all of the questions
provided to you directly. You can open up the assignment,
you can directly see the questions. There's stub code for your answers here. So for instance for question one where you have to figure
out how many gold medals there are. There's a function written,
answer one, and you just write in what
your response is here. You can of course write any python that
you would like, in here, and so forth. So this is a great way
to do your assignments. When you've done your
assignment you just submit it, by clicking the submit button at the top. You can follow that URL to see
details about your submission. In addition you can go to the course page,
click on the programming assignment, And
look at your previous submissions. You can see here I've got a lot
of submissions because I've been testing these notebooks. But you can actually create
a custom solution of your own, offline if you want to do all the work
with the Jupyter Notebooks on your PC, just upload that file as appropriate and
submit it for grading. So those are some of the features that
Coursera has added to the platform for us. Some of the other features are in-video-quizzes 
that allow you to change the code as you're watching the video. So we'll see an example of that here. When you're viewing the video you can
see a number of the IPython notebooks. You'll see these yellow little
marker on the video timeline. These are in video quizzes. Something Coursera's added for us for this
course are, live code in-video-quizzes where you can actually try out what
we're talking about directly in a quiz. So here's an example of that. If you want to run the code you
just hit the Run button and it actually fires up Python on one of
Coursera's remote machines and tries it. And you can fool around with
the method parameters for instance. And rerun the code and explore
the question that's been presented to you. And you just continue with the video
by hitting the Continue button. These are some of the new features, Coursera has added to the platform
to help people learn data science. And I hope you'll tell us what you
think of the Jupyter notebooks, and the new in-video quizzes.